in this short video tutorial I'm gonna
show you an advanced Excel technique
called protect sheet and at this point I
hope that you've watched my beginners
guide to using Excel and also my
intermediate excel tips and tricks for
the advanced stuff I'm just creating
short videos so please check out my
other excel advanced videos when you
have time in this video though we're
gonna look at how to protect a sheet so
I have here a sample sheet and it's
pretty small but it's basically a list
of amazing music some of which you've
probably heard of and others that are
more underground or lesser-known and if
you're interested in learning about some
of this amazing music I'll put some
links in the description below so that
you can click and learn about the music
that should be world-famous that isn't
always so anyway let's say I'm gonna
trust this spreadsheet to someone else
maybe my son or my daughter is gonna go
in and I want them to update the value
of my CD collection and of course this
is just a small sample of the collection
but anyway let's say I want them
occasionally to update the value the
current value of each of these CDs but
I'm afraid that they might accidentally
delete some of this data this data took
me a while to put in there and I want to
protect it so that they can only change
the current value of each item but they
can't ruin the whole record so how would
I go about doing this well it's kind of
tricky and you almost have to think
backwards in order to figure out how to
do this what you need to do is click and
drag to select the cells that I want to
be editable these are the cells that I
want to be editable everything else I
would like to be protected and locked
but these I want to be editable so I
select those cells that range and of
course I could go much further as well
and then I go here to the Home tab home
ribbon and the font group launch button
now honestly I could have picked any of
these launch buttons but I'm going to
click this one the font launch button
and it opens up with some options one of
which is protection there's a protection
tab so I click on it and notice that it
says that those cells that I've selected
are
locked by default all cells in Excel are
locked but they don't seem to be locked
- do they the reason why is because in
order to actually activate this and make
them actually be locked you have to
follow these steps that are listed here
but in this case this is the range that
I don't want to be locked so I'm gonna
uncheck that option click OK and now
those are set up to be unlocked
everything else is set up to be locked
so now to actually activate it to put
the layer of protection over this sheet
so that indeed these are unlocked and
everything else is locked what I have to
do is one more step I have to go to the
review tab the changes group and notice
that there's an option to protect the
sheet so just with a click it brings up
this option protect the sheet and the
contents of locked cells if I want to I
can password protect this so that
students or other people can't just go
here to review and unprotect the sheet I
could password protect it I'm gonna
click OK and so now it's protected this
sheet is protected notice what happens
when I try to type over the words New
Wave it doesn't let me when I try to
type over one of the dates it doesn't
let me those areas are locked but the
part that I set to be unlocked the value
let's say the value goes up on some of
these CDs which often happens I can
click and change those because those
cells I changed them from being
defaulted to locked to be unlocked so
this is a way to protect a sheet that
you're a little concerned that maybe
you're sharing with others and you're
afraid that maybe they'll change the
wrong data accidentally or on purpose
and yet you want them to be able to work
in certain areas of the sheet so thanks
for watching I hope that this is useful
to you please consider connecting with
me on my social media platforms such as
Pinterest Twitter and Facebook and I
really hope that you'll subscribe to my
youtube channel for more videos about
technology for teachers and students and
watch for a new video at least every